<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
			<p>His greeting was most amiable. He was wearing a rather short fur coat that only reached to a little below his knees, and the fur of the coat was of a deep rich brown, so that his pale square yellow beard contrasted with this so abruptly as to seem false. His body was as ever thick and self-confident, and the round fur cap that he wore was cocked ever so slightly to one side. I did not want to see him, but I was caught. I fancied that he knew very well that I wanted to escape, and that now, for sheer perversity, he would see that I did not. Indeed, he caught my arm and drew me out of the Market. We passed into the dusky streets.</p>
			<p>“Now, Ivan Andreievitch,” he said, “this is very pleasant⁠ ⁠… very.⁠ ⁠… You elude me, you know, which is unkind with two so old acquaintances. Of course I know that you dislike me, and I don’t suppose that I have the highest opinion of <em>you</em>, but, nevertheless, we should be interested in one another. Our common experience.⁠ ⁠…” He broke off with a little shiver, and pulled his fur coat closer around him.</p>
			<p>I knew that all that I wanted was to break away. We had passed quickly on leaving the Market into some of the meanest streets of Petrograd. This was the Petrograd of Dostoeffsky, the Petrograd of “Poor Folk” and “Crime and Punishment” and “The Despised and Rejected.”⁠ ⁠… Monstrous groups of flats towered above us, and in the gathering dusk the figures that slipped in and out of the doors were furtive shadows and ghosts. No one seemed to speak; you could see no faces under the spare pale-flamed lamps, only hear whispers and smell rotten stinks and feel the snow, foul and soiled under one’s feet.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“Look here, Semyonov,” I said, slipping from the control of his hand, “it’s just as you say. We don’t like one another, and we know one another well enough to say so. Neither you nor I wish to revive the past, and there’s nothing in the present that we have in common.”</p>
			<p>“Nothing!” He laughed. “What about my delightful nieces and their home circle? You were always one to shrink from the truth, Ivan Andreievitch. You fancy that you can sink into the bosom of a charming family and escape the disadvantages.⁠ ⁠… Not at all. There are always disadvantages in a Russian family. <em>I</em> am the disadvantage in this one.” He laughed again, and insisted on taking my arm once more. “If you feel so strongly about me, Durward” (when he used my surname he always accented the second syllable very strongly) “all you have to do is to cut my niece Vera out of your visiting list. That, I imagine, is the last thing that you wish. Well, then⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Vera Michailovna is my friend,” I said hotly⁠—it was foolish of me to be so easily provoked, but I could not endure his sneering tone. “If you imply⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense,” he answered sharply, “I imply nothing. Do you suppose that I have been more than a month here without discovering the facts? It’s your English friend Lawrence who is in love with Vera⁠—and Vera with him.”</p>
			<p>“That is a lie!” I cried.</p>
			<p>He laughed. “You English,” he said, “are not so unobservant as you seem, but you hate facts. Vera and your friend Lawrence have been in love with one another since their first meeting, and my dear nephew-in-law Markovitch knows it.”</p>
			<p>“That’s impossible,” I cried. “He⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No,” Semyonov replied, “I was wrong. He does not know it⁠—he suspects. And my nephew-in-law in a state of suspicion is a delightful study.”</p>
			<p>By now we were in a narrow street, so dark that we stumbled at every step. We seemed to be quite alone.</p>
			<p>It was I who now caught his arm. “Semyonov!” I said, and my urgency stopped him so that he stood where he was. “Leave them alone! Leave them alone! They’ve done no harm to you, they can offer you nothing, they are not intelligent enough for you nor amusing enough. Even if it is true what you say it will pass⁠—Lawrence will go away. I will see that he does. Only leave them alone! For God’s sake, let them be!”</p>
			<p>His face was very close to mine, and, looking at it in the gathering dark, it was as though it were a face of glass behind which other faces passed and repassed. I cannot hope to give any idea of the strange mingling of regret, malice, pride, pain, scorn, and humour that those eyes showed. His red lips parted as though he would speak, for a moment he turned away from me and looked down the black tunnel of the street, then he walked forward again.</p>
			<p>“You are wrong, my friend,” he said, “if you imagine that there is no amusement for me in the study of my family. It <em>is</em> my family, you know. I have none other. Perhaps it has never occurred to you, Durward, that possibly I am a lonely man.”</p>
			<p>As he spoke I heard again the echo of that voice as it vanished into the darkness.⁠ ⁠… “No one?” and the answer: “No one.”⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“Don’t imagine,” he continued, “that I am asking for your pity. That indeed would be humorous. I pity no one, and I despise the men who have it to bestow⁠ ⁠… but there are situations in life that are intolerable, Ivan Andreievitch, and any man who <em>is</em> a man will see that he escapes from such a thing. May I not find in the bosom of my family such an escape?” He laughed.</p>
			<p>“I know nothing about that,” I began hotly. “All I know is⁠—”</p>
			<p>But he went on as though he had not heard me.</p>
			<p>“Have you ever thought about death since you came away from the Front, Durward? It used to occupy your mind a good deal while you were there, I remember⁠—in a foolish, romantic, sentimental way of course. You’ll forgive my saying that your views of death were those of a secondhand novelist⁠—all the same I’ll do you the justice of acknowledging that you had studied it at first hand. You’re not a coward, you know.”</p>
			<p>I was struck most vividly with a sense of his uneasiness. During those other days uneasy was the very last thing that I ever would have said that he was⁠—even after his catastrophe his grip of his soul did not loosen. It was just that loosening that I felt now; he had less control of the beasts that dwelt beneath the ground of his house, and he could hear them snarl and whine, and could feel the floor quiver with the echo of their movements.</p>
			<p>I suddenly knew that I was afraid of him no longer.</p>
			<p>“Now, see, Alexei Petrovitch,” I said, “it isn’t death that we want to talk about now. It is a much simpler thing. It is, that you shouldn’t for your own amusement simply go in and spoil the lives of some of my friends for nothing at all except your own stupid pride. If that’s your plan I’m going to prevent it.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Ivan Andreievitch,” he cried, laughing, “this is a challenge.”</p>
			<p>“You can take it as what you please,” I answered gravely.</p>
			<p>“But, incorrigible sentimentalist,” he went on, “tell me⁠—are you, English and moralist and believer in a good and righteous God as you are, are you really going to encourage this abominable adultery, this open, ruthless wrecking of a good man’s home? You surprise me; this is a new light on your otherwise rather uninteresting character.”</p>
			<p>“Never mind my character,” I answered him; “all you’ve got to do is to leave Vera Michailovna alone. There’ll be no wrecking of homes, unless you are the wrecker.”</p>
			<p>He put his hand on my arm again.</p>
			<p>“Listen, Durward,” he said, “I’ll tell you a little story. I’m a doctor you know, and many curious things occur within my province. Well, some years ago I knew a man who was very miserable and very proud. His pride resented that he should be miserable, and he was always suspecting that people saw his weakness, and as he despised human nature, and thought his companions fools and deserving of all that they got, and more, he couldn’t bear the thought that they should perceive that he allowed himself to be unhappy. He coveted death. If it meant extinction he could imagine nothing pleasanter than so restful an aloofness, quiet and apart and alone, whilst others hurried and scrambled and pursued the future.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“And if death did not mean extinction then he thought that he might snatch and secure for himself something which in life had eluded him. So he coveted death. But he was too proud to reach it by suicide. That seemed to him a contemptible and cowardly evasion, and such an easy solution would have denied the purpose of all his life. So he looked about him and discovered amongst his friends a man whose character he knew well, a man idealistic and foolish and romantic, like yourself, Ivan Andreievitch, only caring more for ideas, more impulsive and more reckless. He found this man and made him his friend. He played with him as a cat does with a mouse. He enjoyed life for about a year and then he was murdered.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Murdered!” I exclaimed.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—shot by his idealistic friend. I envy him that year. He must have experienced many breathless sensations. When the murderer was tried his only explanation was that he had been irritated and disappointed.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Disappointed of what?’ asked the judge.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Of everything in which he believed.⁠ ⁠…’ said the man.</p>
			<p>“It seemed a poor excuse for a murder; he is still, I have no doubt, in Siberia.</p>
			<p>“But I envy my friend. That was a delightful death to die.⁠ ⁠… Good night, Ivan Andreievitch.”</p>
			<p>He waved his hand at me and was gone. I was quite alone in the long black street, engulfed by the high, overhanging flats.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
